## Deep Aesthetics


New technologies like photography and film led to a revision of the collective sensory cortex, exposing the viewer to new ways of cultivating the body as the locus of sensory appreciation, perception, and performance, while also signaling a perceptual shift in how someone achieves full fulfillment. The manner in which this specific medium; the new media, has altered our brains demonstrates how human perception has evolved over time as our primary means of experiencing the world. “Media aesthetics is the activity of thinking about our experience of contemporary art through questioning the borders between the notion of “medium” (a means for expression) and “media” (a means for communication), and between art techniques and cultural means”. [^Mariochi25deep]  However, new media deep aesthetics describes the aesthetics that are generated by new technologies such as deepfakes, and artificial intelligence, where that aesthetic is not shaped by humans, but through the curation of algorithms. Computational perceptions frequently combine data taken from different sources, combining digital simulation with real-world imagery that often are hyper-realistic. Therefore, the rise of such aesthetics in the era of surveillance capitalism also brings with it unanticipated risks related to its use, like the aestheticization of politics and the politicization of art where political positions including the argument of control and ownership are to blame for this. 

Beyond the realm of new media aesthetics, a deeper connection with digital aesthetic is required due to the rapid transformation brought about by modern digital technology that have altered mediums alter human perception and brain. [^Boccali24digital]

In the context of image production, Anna Munster examined how racialized and neurotypical, modalities of knowledge and experience are operationally intertwined with machine learning. In fact, since AI aesthetics are built from already existing data, which can include bias information, the aesthetics generated can often be discriminatory, as AI platforms tend to be neutral towards many human topics. [^Munster25deep]
^


[^Boccali24digital]: Boccali, Renato., Andreini, Giulia., 2024. Digital Aesthetics

[^Mariochi25deep]: Mariochi, Dario. 2025. Deep Aesthetics

[^Munster25deep]: Munster, Anna. 2025. Deep Aesthetics: Computational Experience in a Time of Machine Learning

