## Modulation

According to the online Cambridge dictionary, modulation as a noun is “a small change that happens in response to something or is intended to achieve an effect.”[^cambridge-modulation] In sound, modulation can be seen as “a change in the style, loudness,[…] of something such as your voice in order to achieve an effect or express an emotion.”[^cambridge-modulation] Change seems to be a pattern in both of these definitions, and the dictionary even suggests “change” as a synonym to modulation. However, to properly assess the significance of modulation in new media, one must understand what enables modulation—namely, modularity. Modularity is “the quality of consisting of separate parts that, when combined, form a complete whole.”[^cambridge-modularity] Therefore, for modulation to take place, an object or thing must consist of smaller parts that can be tweaked and/or reassembled. As a result, modulation cannot exist without modularity and according to Lev Manovich, modularity is a key principle of new media.  

In The _Language of New Media_, Manovich highlights modularity as the second principle out of the 5 principles of new media. He calls this principle the “fractal structure of new media”  essentially meaning that “a new media object consists from independent parts which, in their turn, consist from smaller independent parts, and so on, up to the level of smallest “atoms” such as pixels, 3D points or characters.”[^manovich-principles] In current technologies, modularity manifests itself in the way media elements, such as videos, images or even sound can be represented as a collection “of discrete samples (pixels, polygons, voxels, characters, scripts).”[^manovich-principles] The collection of these samples is closely related to the organization of databases since these parts are essentially just pieces of data that can be accessed at any time.  Thus, modulation and data organization are linked as modulation is the result of using databases in new media. For example, the internet consists of numerous web pages, which in turn consist of separate media (HTML) elements such as images, text, videos and so on. This list of elements can be considered as the database of each webpage and as Manovich highlights in the article “Database as Symbolic Form,” “It is always possible to add a new element to the list — all you have to do is to open a file and add a new line.”[^manovich-database] The possibility to add new elements to sites means sites never have to be complete, underlining how the modulation of new media creates a culture where media can always be changed, therefore new media is constantly in a flow of change and evolvement.


[^cambridge-modularity]: Cambridge University Press & Assessment . 2026. Modularity. Accessed February 21, 2026. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/modularity.

[^cambridge-modulation]: Cambridge University Press & Assessment. 2026. Modulation. Accessed February 21, 2026. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/modulation.

[^manovich-database]: Manovich, Lev. 1999. "Database as Symbolic Form." Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies 80-99.

[^manovich-principles]: Manovich, Lev. 2001. The Language of New Media. Cambridge: Mit Press.

